For  most  people,  literacy  has  a  nonpolitical  function.  It  is  there  supposedly  to  help
form the intellectual character of a person and to provide paths to upward mobility.
Yet, the process of both defining what counts as literacy and how it should be gained
has  always  had  links  to  particular  regimes  of  morality  as  well.  Literacy  was  often
there  to  produce  economic  skills  and  a  shared  system  of  beliefs  and  values,  to  help
create  a  “national  culture.”  As  the  author  of  a  recent  volume  on  newly  emerging
redefinitions  of  literacy  in  education  has  put  it,  it  served  as  something  of  a  “moral
technology  of  the  soul.”
An  emphasis  on  literacy  as  both  “moral  technology”  and  economically  driven
skills  is  of  course  not  the  only  way  one  could  and  should  approach  the  issue,  no
matter what  the Right keeps  telling us. The value of writing, speaking, and listening
should  not  be  seen  as  access  to  “refined  culture”  or  to  “life  skills”  for  our  allotted
(by  whom?)  places in  the  paid  and  unpaid labor market,  but  as  a  crucial means  to
gain power and control over our entire lives. In  responding  to  the dangers posed by
the  conservative  restoration,  I  argued  that  our  aim  should  not  be  to  create  “functional literacy,” but critical literacy, powerful literacy, political literacy which enables
the  growth  of  genuine understanding  and  control  of  all  of  the  spheres  of  social life
in  which  we  participate.
This involves a different vision of knowledge and culture. Neither of these concepts
refers  to  a  false  universality,  a  pregiven  consensus  that is  divorced  from  patterns  of
domination and exploitation. Rather  they refer  to  the utterly complex struggles over
who  has  the  right  to  “name  the  world.”
Take  the word  “culture.” Culture—the way  of life  of  a  people,  the  constant  and
complex  process  by  which  meanings  are  made  and  shared—does  not  grow  out  of
the  pregiven  unity  of  a  society.  Rather, in many ways, it  grows  out of its  divisions.
It  has  to work to  construct  any  unity  that it  has. The idea  of  culture  should  not  be
used  to “celebrate  an  achieved or natural harmony.” Culture is instead “a producer
and  reproducer  of  value  systems  and  power  relations.”
The  same is  true  for  the  way  we  think  about knowledge.  Speaking  theoretically,
John  Fiske  reminds  us  of  this:
Knowledge  is  never  neutral,  it  never  exists  in  an  empiricist,  objective  relationship  to  the  real.  Knowledge is  power,  and  the  circulation  of  knowledge is  part
of the social distribution of power. The discursive power to construct a commonsense  reality  that  can  be inserted into  cultural  and  political life is  central in  the city. 
